A history of any artistic movement can be read through the spaces that fostered it, and for digital art this is especially true. Inherently breaking new technical ground and operating outside traditional markets, the development of the UK digital art landscape has been reliant on a series of hubs, nodes and networks. Through a series of interviews with 16 artists and curators, this essay looks at the who, what, and where that allowed a national scene to thrive from the 1990s to the present. 

From grassroot instigators to institutional representatives, the individuals interviewed for this report present through their answers a picture of their personal experience within the field. At the same time it is important to highlight that while many of them are attached to specific art practices or movements, such as net art or media art, they do not necessarily call themselves digital artists or curators because the term is broad<sup>[^2]</sup>. The umbrella term ‘digital art’ is applied here in response to the V&A’s Digital Art Collection, on which this research is based, and in order to bring together practitioners from different artistic backgrounds. The interviewees were Heath Bunting, Ruth Catlow (Furtherfield), Alison Craighead (Thomson & Craighead), Sofia Crespo, Nina Davies, Marc Garrett (Furtherfield), Libby Heaney, Zaiba Jabbar (Hervisions), Keiken, Lawrence Lek, Irini Papadimitriou, Anna Ridler, Erica Scourti, Jon Thomson (Thomson & Craighead), Nye Thompson and Kay Watson (Serpentine Galleries). 

The questionnaire employed here was designed to identify the hubs (spaces), nodes (individuals) and networks that were fundamental to the scenes from which their practices originated. These three elements are positioned within specific periods across each text to evoke particular moments, but in most cases the artists’ work spans decades into the present as well. Additionally, it is worth noting that more than 150 individuals, 40 spaces and 50 networks were mentioned in the responses, but owing to space limitations not all of them have been included. Therefore, this essay can be considered as a first and partial attempt at starting to understand the fundamental factors that have shaped the UK’s digital art ecology in the last three decades. 

Responding to the growing access to the internet, the 1990s saw the development of a new range of artistic hubs and networks that differed from the organisations of the 1970s and ‘80s. At a time when access to the internet was limited and expensive, venues such as Backspace (1996–9) in Clink Street, London, filled a void by providing an alternative to mainstream cybercafe commerce. Founded by six individuals, including James Stevens, Backspace provided ‘an open environment for exploration and expression on the Internet’<sup>[^3]</sup>. Working with the space’s community, invited artists organized events now key to the UK net art scene, including the ‘ANTI WITH E’ lecture series (1997) and the ‘Expo Destructo, Post-Media Flea Market’ (1999), hosted on Charing Cross Road, London. Both events brought together an international community of hacktivists and creatives such as the artists Rachel Baker, Heath Bunting, Pete Gomes, Olia Lialina, Geert Lovink, Cornelia Sollfrank, Alexei Shulgin and the two UK-based collectives Mongrel and Thomson & Craighead. The Arts Technology Centre (Artec) (1990–2001), located in Islington, London, was equally important as a point of access to technology. Established in 1990 with the support of the European Commission’s London Initiative<sup>[^4]</sup>, Artec is known as the first centre for creative applications of digital technology in the UK. Its programme supported artists through residencies and commissions, in addition to delivering training courses for young and long-term unemployed people. Some of its early staff members include the producer Frank Boyd and the artists Derek Richards and Graham Harwood. From that appointment, Harwood went on to co-found the collective Mongrel <sup>[^5]</sup>(1995–2008) with Artec students Richard Pierre-Davis and Mervin Jarman, alongside artist Matsumoto Yokokoji.<sup>[^6]</sup> 

Working more nomadically and founded both on and offline, artist-led organizations such as Furtherfield (1996–present), co-founded by artists Ruth Catlow and Marc Garrett, have been pivotal for reclaiming network technologies as tools for hacktivist critique and artistic collaborative practice. Catlow viewed the internet as a ‘hybrid machine-societal context for art making’<sup>[^7]</sup> where objects could be shaped simultaneously by audiences and artists, moving away from the traditional view of artworks as objects owned and displayed in gallery spaces. Similarly, Garrett saw the internet as a means of ‘creating a shared imaginative context’<sup>[^8]</sup> where people could learn new skills to collectively build a different reality. Their ethos echoed the sentiment of a generation of creatives that were eager to produce new distribution channels that could challenge the consumerist status quo of the mass media and its control over public space.

At a time in which net art had little or no recognition within the institutional art establishment, these grassroot spaces were important in fuelling international collaboration and nurturing a creative community. Supporting all of this activity, a range of online networks formed through mailing lists and Bulletin Board Systems (BBS) to enable people to interact and share their activities. Examples include the World Wide Web Newsletter (1993–4) created by the technologist Ivan Pope at Goldsmiths College [Now Goldsmiths, University of London],<sup>[^9]</sup> and the cybercafe BBS (1994-96), run by the artists Rachel Baker, Heath Bunting and Marc Garret. Cybercafe was the forerunner of Furtherfield and the web server irational.org (1996–2006),<sup>[^10]</sup> which Bunting founded and invited artists Daniel G. Andújar, Rachel Baker, Kayle Brandon, Minerva Cuevas and Marcus Valentine to be part of. Other online key spaces for exchange and critique were *Mute* magazine (1994–present), founded by the artists Pauline van Mourik Broekman and Simon Worthington, and the Europe based mailing lists Nettime (1995–present), Syndicate (1996–2001) and Rhizome (1996–present).<sup>[^11]</sup> The latter became an organization dedicated to born-digital art and affiliated in 2003 with the New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York. 

Mainstream art spaces responded to these activities too, for example Tate started a series of net artwork commissions (2000–12) with Graham Harwood’s *Uncomfortable Proximity* and Simon Patterson’s *Le Match des Couleurs*.<sup>[^12]</sup> Similarly, the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA), London, opened its New Media Centre in 1998 and appointed curator Benjamin Weil as its director. Smaller organizations such as Merseyside Moviola,<sup>[^13]</sup> which produced the UK’s largest international video-art festival Video Positive (1989–2000) in partnership with Tate Liverpool, formed into FACT Liverpool in 2003, an arts venue that has continued championing the presentation of emerging artists working with film and digital technology. 

Despite the growing institutional interest in digital art, most activities continued to be developed by independent organizations and artist-led spaces into the 2000s. Kay Watson, currently Head of Arts Technologies at Serpentine Galleries, London, highlights that ‘the community around artist-run spaces and experimental project spaces in London was key in the early 2000s and 2010s.’<sup>[^14]</sup> Following the DIY (Do-it-Yourself) attitudes of rave culture in the UK in the 1990s,<sup>[^15]</sup> experimental festivals dedicated to arts and digital culture emerged such as Futuresonic (1996–2009, now Future Everything) in Manchester;<sup>[^16]</sup> the DMZ Media Arts Festival taking place at Limehouse Town Hall, London (14–15 November 2003); NODE.London (2006–21); Abandon Normal Devices (2009–present) in Liverpool; Electromagnetic Field (2012–present) in Ledbury; and Mediale (2014–present), in York. These festivals have brought together an international community of artists and technologists, and were important in producing new languages with which to understand the post-internet digital condition.<sup>[^17]</sup> They also served as sites of exchange where groups could raise awareness of how people could reclaim technologies despite the increasing corporatization of the internet. Irini Papadimitriou, currently Director of Exhibitions at Diriyah Art Futures, Riyadh, explains that the free and open-source software (FOSS)<sup>[^18]</sup> and collective prototyping culture present at these events were what inspired her to launch the V&A’s Digital Design Weekend (2011–present)<sup>[^19]</sup>. Other relevant event-based networks that emerged during this period were Dorkbot London (2001–present),<sup>[^20]</sup> which has hosted more than 244 speakers over the years including artists Beatrice Gibson, Amy Alexander and Wojciech Kosma, and Algorave (2011–present),<sup>[^21]</sup> which has developed an expansive international network of practitioners including artist Ivan Abreu, composer Alexandra Cárdenas and AI and music researcher Norah Lorway. Dorkbot brought a community of creatives together to showcase work in progress, while Algorave combined sound and visual experimentations in live coding sessions. 

Complementing the creative networking opportunities generated through these events, online modes of dissemination maintained popularity. Key examples from this period are Furtherfield’s NetBehaviour (2003–present) and the Curatorial Resource for Upstart Media Bliss (CRUMB) (2000–24), founded by curators Sarah Cook and Beryl Graham. CRUMB was based at the University of Sunderland and as a mailing list it operated both as a critical space and a resource for practitioners interested in curating media art. Other universities followed suit in formalizing their support towards media practices: Goldsmiths, University of London, founded its MA Computational Arts programme in 2004 and Newcastle University opened its Culture Lab in 2006. These spaces have nurtured new generations of creatives and incentivized interdisciplinary approaches to digital technologies. Comparably, non-profit educational spaces such as Access Space (2000–present) in Sheffield, where artist Jake Harris has directed the Art & Innovation programme since 2007, and London Hack Space (2009–present), founded by software engineers Russ Garrett and Jonty Wareing,<sup>[^22]</sup> have been important venues to provide technological access and training outside of academic frameworks. Alongside those venues, NEoN Digital Arts (2009–present) in Dundee, directed by curator Donna Holford-Lovell, and Vivid Projects (2012–present) in Birmingham, originated by curator Yasmeen Baig-Clifford, have offered important skills-developed programming in addition to exhibitions and events.

Following the post-internet turn, artists increasingly sought to express the material qualities of digital networks, driving a need for studios and artist-led spaces specializing in physically presenting media artworks to live audiences. Existing studio organization SPACE, in London, opened a programme titled Media Arts (2005–11), which was run by creative Gini Simpson (2003–8) and thanks to the curator Rachel Falconer (2013–6) developed other digitally focused strands of activity. Furthermore, arebyte Gallery (2013–present), founded by Nimrod Vardi, mixes studio complex and innovative digital art exhibitions, and Somerset House Studios (2015–present), founded by creative producer Marie McPartlin, would become a geographically central site of digital art thanks to its fabrication lab facilities and advisory services. 

Complementing the new type of studios mentioned above were artist-led galleries that created exhibition and screening opportunities in London. Examples include Lima Zulu (2000–16) in Manor House, co-run by curator Ben Vickers; Banner Repeater (2010–present) in Hackney Downs train station, founded by artist Ami Clarke; and Gossamer Fog (2016–present), founded by artist Samuel Capps in Deptford, which has recently launched a virtual production studio. At the same time, certain studios have also been key in incubating more spontaneous and inventive events, such as the series of Bring Your Own Beamer (BYOB) one-night exhibitions hosted by SPACE Media Arts in 2013 and 2017,<sup>[^23]</sup> in which artists projected their interactive projects to an informal audience. 

Running in parallel to these various efforts, art institutions created new posts and launched more experimental programmes to present the work of artists exploring the social effects of network technology. Examples include the curated club nights organized by the ICA’s Director of Live and Digital, Vivienne Gaskin (1996–2006); the inaugural appointment of Katrina Sluis as Senior Curator of Digital Programmes at the Photographers’ Gallery (2011–9); the launch of the Open Data Institute’s (ODI) Data as Culture art programme (2014–present), directed by Hannah Redler Hawes;<sup>[^24]</sup> and Serpentine Galleries’ first digital commission *AGNES (2014–9) by artist Cécile B. Evans,<sup>[^25]</sup>* which was overseen by Serpentine’s first digital art curator Ben Vickers, of Lima Zulu. 



Taking place alongside these in-person activities was the development of social-media platforms such as Facebook (2004), YouTube (2005), Tumblr (2007) and Instagram (2011). The popularity of these platforms amongst creatives grew rapidly due to their potential to serve as both a motif and medium for social critique, while working as sites for exhibitions and peer-to-peer exchange. From 2015, multiple online artistic platforms and networks emerged in the UK including Digital Artist Residency(2015–22)<sup>[^26]</sup>, [ANTI]MATERIA(2016–present)<sup>[^27]</sup>, Compiler (2016–present)<sup>[^28]</sup>, isthisit? (2016–present)<sup>[^29]</sup>, Skelf (2016–22)<sup>[^30]</sup>, DRIVE-THRU (2017–8), Off Site Project (2017–present)<sup>[^31]</sup>, Going Away TV (2019–21)<sup>[^32]</sup>, Most Dismal Swamp (2019–present)<sup>[^33]</sup> and SPUR (2020–present)<sup>[^34]</sup>. Based in the UK, but with an international outreach, these platforms created a new space for an emerging generation of artists. Additionally, Hervisions (2015–present)<sup>[^35]</sup> and Digi-Gxl (2019–present)<sup>[^36]</sup> originated to support femme identify and non-binary artists specifically as a way to combat an historically male-dominated art scene. Overseas, the Wrong Biennale<sup>[^37]</sup> (2013–present), based in Spain, was a key international network established to motivate some of the above spaces to produce nomadic physical events and exhibitions, in addition to their online programmes. These activities motivated more established organizations to produce a consistent online programme to complement their onsite activities, for example the Photographers’ Gallery’s ‘Screen Walks’ series (2020–present), which was produced in collaboration with the Fotomuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; and arebyte Gallery’s open-call initiative ‘arebyte on Screen’ (2019–present). 

Finally, in the early 2010s London commercial galleries started to identify the potential of artistic practices dedicated to digital culture. Caroll/Fletcher (2012–7), founded by Jonathon Carroll and Steve Fletcher, and Gazelli Art House (2010–present), founded by Mila Askarova, are examples of galleries that have supported experimental practices and bridged between artists from different generations through consistent online and onsite programming. Around that period, the Lumen Prize for Art and Technology was founded by Carla Rapoport to recognize artists working with technologies and to raise awareness of their practices. More recently, with the rising interest in the blockchain and Non Fungible Tokens (NFTs), other types of commercial spaces such as VERSE.Works (2022–present) have emerged to develop a sales model that combines physical exhibitions and events with transactions on the blockchain. Similarly, through GAZELLI.iO (2015–present), Gazelli Art House has produced sales of artworks on the blockchain while developing residencies and dedicated project spaces for digital and virtual reality (VR) art. Lastly, other UK-based networks have formed to produce forums to discuss issues around ownership and the blockchain, for example the Digital Art Salon (2022–3) and Right Click Save Magazine (2022–present). 

By reflecting back on the past 30 years, it can be observed that the UK’s digital art ecology has four principal pillars of distinctive activity. The first is characterized by DIY community spaces such as Backspace, London Hack Space and Vivid Projects, which have provided access to technologies and training opportunities for creatives. These venues have encouraged a critical approach to technologies and generated informal research strategies. In the same way, at the time of writing, universities are developing programmes dedicated to more experimental prototyping and research – some examples are University College London’s new BA in Art and Technology; University of the Arts London’s Creative Computing Institute; Manchester Metropolitan University’s School of Digital Arts; and University of Plymouth’s PhD in Digital Art and Technology. The second pillar pertains to experimental exhibition spaces such as Furtherfield, Lima Zulu, arebyte Gallery, isthistit? and Somerset House Studios. These spaces allow artists to obtain necessary support to create new work and to generate peer-to-peer networks, in addition to pioneering inventive ways to present digital art practices to the general public. The third pillar comprises event-based communities exemplified by events and festivals such as Algorave, Abandon Normal Devices and Electromagnetic Field. These events are relevant to the aim of presenting emerging artistic practices to a wider audience and to enable artists to showcase their work within a more experiential and relaxed setting. The fourth pillar is formed of commercial spaces such as Caroll/Fletcher, Gazelli Art House and VERSE.works, which have been pivotal in establishing a market for digital artistic practices and supporting artists to factor in the legacy of their work. Atop these pillars sits institutional recognition, which has been essential to bringing these communities of practice to a wider audience. 
