---
title: "Interview: Stephen Willats"
layout: essay
order: 1200
---
Stephen Willats (b. 1943, United Kingdom) is a multidisciplinary artist who combines in his work cybernetics, advertising research, learning and communications theory, and computer technology. Since the early 1960s, Willats has located his work in individual and social behaviours and through collaborative and participatory artworks has sought to generate societal change. 

**Pita Arreola:** Reflecting on the beginning of your career, could you elaborate on your earliest encounters with computer art and how you came to incorporate certain methodologies and technologies into your practice? 

**Stephen Willats:** Foremost, I never thought of my [creative] life as a career. I always saw myself as an artist pursuing ideas. The idea that there would be structure in terms of a career never occurred to me. Now, to answer your question, we have to go back to 1958 when the world I was living in was changing remarkably quickly from the world that my parents lived in. Suddenly, there was a whole generation rebelling against the restrictions and conventions of earlier generations. All the barriers began to break down. People started to feel mobile and to think that a new vision of a world could be transformed into reality. These changes led to avant-garde ideas becoming prevalent at that time in the art world across Europe and the UK. From the point of view of the artist, we had the idea that a work of art needed to move forward and push things further.

Remarkably, in 1958, I found myself working at Drian Galleries, in London, as a gallery assistant at a very young age and meeting significant artists from the UK, like Henry Moore and Francis Bacon, and from Europe and Latin America, such as Yaacov Agam, Lucio Fontana, Gyula Kosice and the Zero Group. The gallery was connected to Europe, which was very unusual at that time. Most of the galleries back then were linked to St Ives and the British tradition. During that time, I helped to organize and present many exhibitions including the solo and group shows of Stephen Gilbert, Piero Manzoni, the Group Zero and the British Constructivist artists, as well as Eastern European artists. Kosice and Agam were particularly important to me. Kosice was a socialist and had the idea that the audience should engage with the variables that the work was constructed from and find personal meaning in their experience by reorganizing the work’s configurations, so the work became interactive and the audience an active participant, instead of operating as a receiver of the message as you would do with radio. This concept was quite significant for me.

Not many people came to the gallery, so I had plenty of free time. My father was an archivist and he managed to get books from the library that he passed to me. I read books by the philosophers Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Marshall McLuhan and the sociologist Basil Bernstein. Through them, I began to realize that the construction of the world was ideological and that the world I lived in could be different, and people could behave and socialize differently. I figured that instead of having vertical social hierarchies, there could be horizontal networks. When I was not reading, I drew sketches on how the gallery could function as a space, trying to improve the visitor experience. I thought we had all these fabulous exhibitions happening and nobody was coming. Through this analysis, it seemed to me that artworks demand at least two factors, person A and person B. In other words, there had to be a network of exchanges for the exhibition to really operate and have some meaning in the wider world.

Another book my father gave me was *Mechanization of Thought Processes* (1958), based on a symposium that was organized by the National Physical Laboratory, in England, on the fundamentals of artificial intelligence (AI) and neural systems, and cybernetics as a philosophical and language modelling tool. Many significant practitioners attended this symposium such as the neurophysiologist and robotician William Grey Walter, the computer scientist Marvin Minsky, the cybernetician Gordon Pask and the scientist Heinz von Foerster. 

After reading that publication, I began to think about how neural systems could give us a model of society. Realizing that I needed to connect to all these ideas, I set up a think tank in 1961–2 with mathematicians, philosophers and artists. Theories sprang up all over the place, such as behavioural theory, game theory, lateral thinking theory, learning theory, random variable theory, probability theory and systems theory, just to name a few. Responding to these, I made a series of works that were to be part of my first exhibition at Gallery One, in central London, which was a famous avant-garde gallery at that time. These works were participatory and experienced in a sequence like a learning program, starting with *Work No. 1* (1962) a very simple set of variables and gradually increasing in complexity to *Work No. 6* (1962). Using a response sheet, participants could plot the changes they were making or their relationship with the work. These sheets were then exhibited next to the work and people could see that outcomes were relative to the individual person. Unfortunately, the gallery went bankrupt a month before my show. (Eventually these works were displayed in 2014 at the ‘Control. Stephen Willats. Work 1962–69’ exhibition curated by Alex Sainsbury at Raven Row, in London) 

Around that time, I realized that I needed new tools to develop further my ideas and one of the consequences was that I published a series of manifestos on topics related to the new attitudes and vision of art practice including Conceptualism and the omnidirectional nature of reality. I used to distribute them at gallery openings and the galleries did not like it. For this reason, I found myself out on the street quite often. But the idea of the manifestos was to disrupt things as they were and to create a conceptual and intellectual territory in which my ideas could be received. Then, the artist Dennis Bowen, who opened the New Vision Centre Gallery, in London, told me about this Groundcourse at Ealing School of Art run by the artist Roy Ascott and suggested that I left my job at the gallery and went there. The staff included the most relevant artists in London at that time, Brian Wall, Bernard and Harold Cohen, Anthony Benjamin and William Green, who was one of the first Auto-destructivers, even before the artist Gustav Metzger. It was a very radical group and an exciting place to go. Ascott had been in Newcastle and that region was very influenced by the artist László Moholy-Nagy and the Institute of Design in Chicago. For this reason, the course presented ideas of media dexterity. At that point, Ascott also made the statement that ‘theory should precede practice’ which changed culture.

One day, Gordon Pask came to give a lecture. Not many students knew about his work, but I had read the paper he presented at the ‘Mechanization of Thought Processes’* symposium. His lecture introduced students to the idea of cybernetics and discussed relevant principles like feedback and the black box. I found the lecture very inspiring because it presented another type of society where instead of preserving information as power, there was a possibility of distributing information within an interactive network of mutuality. Bernard Cohen commented that Pask was trying to turn people into machines to which Pask responded, ‘You have infinite variables; you are not just machines’. His lecture had a profound impact on the staff, and it provoked a radical change in the work of that group of artists. 

In my case, in 1963, I went to work at the System Research Lab, in Richmond, where I met the cybernetician George Mallen and the mathematician Peter Whittle. This opened possibilities for creating a totally new language for artists. In artistic movements like Cubism and Futurism, artists were encoding reality through a language of objects. Whereas cybernetics presented a language that described a world based on the flow of information. I did not want to make pictures of cybernetics, I wanted to use it as a framework for engineering interactive simulation. Systems Research was significant for this process. Whittle was one of the early people using digital programs for electronic engineering and we discussed how I could build something. Then I met Chris Grimshaw, who was running a lab in Oxford, and he took over these discussions. Around this time, I developed a series of works based on the idea of cooperative behaviour that led to the creation of my work *Visual Homeostat* (1966–9).* This work is composed of two units which were coupled through photoelectric cells and an ultrasonic environment. The units were quite large, around 1.83 metres high by 3.65 metres wide, and the work was shown in a dark environment. As soon as the work detected someone within its ultrasonic field, it turned itself on and ran a program of lights which followed sequences over a mesh. The speed of the lights was reactive to the audience’s presence and they could also interfere with the activity between the units by standing between them and by doing so, triggering different programs. I made those works for a project at Tate that never took place. 

**PA:** Since early in your career, you have taken part in different events and exhibitions such as ‘Electric Theatre’, Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA), London (1971); *‘*INTERACT Machine: Man: Society’ (1973), organized by the Computer Arts Society (CAS) for the Edinburgh International Festival; and ‘Structures and Codes’*,* Royal College of Art, London (1975). Could you tell us about these and other events that were both memorable and important in establishing the creative circle that your practice originates from, or that further raised the profile of your community of practice?  

**SW:** During the 1960s many people from the underground cultural scene would come to my studio, as well as scientists such as Christopher Evans, Basil Bernstein, Edward de Bono and Desmond Morris, who were exploring language codes on apes. De Bono’s work was very influential for my work; he came up with the concept of ‘lateral thinking’ which challenges linear thinking. At that time people were trying to break down the barriers between different disciplines, so you had conversations between artists and scientists. The first exhibition that I had in 1964 was at a small gallery set up by doctors at the Chester Beatty Research Institute, a public research institute specialized in oncology situated in Fulham Road, London, because they understood all the potential of these ideas while the mainstream of the art world certainly did not. Shortly after this, in a period of self-doubt about the special role of the artist’s creativity, I stopped calling myself an artist and became a conceptual designer for nine months. 

Around that time, in 1965, I started *Control* magazine and made clothing like the example that is part of the V&A’s collection. The idea was to create new ways to understand an artwork, for example, with the piece of clothing you could wear it and it changed your engagement with other people you might encounter and the world you passed through while wearing it. Additionally, you could buy it at a boutique instead of an art gallery. Though London galleries like Indica and Signals were very significant places at that time, they were not linked to digital art as you define it nowadays. Signals was linked to ideas of kineticism and was an important place for artists to connect with each other. Indica emerged later. 

I was part of this milieu. I met John Sharkey who was a concrete poet and also worked at the ICA. There was also a group of people who organized with Gustav Metzger the ‘Destruction in Art Symposium’ (1966). I was part of that team and helped to create the promotional materials. I also wrote an essay for a presentation, *The Mechanistic Crisis,* which looked at decision-making and problem-solving within hierarchical linear and self-organizing systems. The idea was that this symposium would bring people together just like ‘Mechanization of Thought Processes’ did for cybernetics at a time where the art world was becoming increasingly politicized with Marxism, determinism and anarchism. It was a very interesting period, but also became frightening as the 1960s progressed because people were becoming somewhat paranoid.

**PA:** Around the period these events took place, what specific vocabulary was being used to describe digital art? It would be good to hear about that, considering how terminologies have changed across different periods.  

**SW:** That was a problem, because I have been in many exhibitions with many different terminologies. Including ‘Kunst Licht Kunst’ (1966) at the Stedelijk van Abbemuseum in Eindhoven, which was a major exhibition of light art, and ‘Kinetic four dimensional’ (‘K.4’) (1967) which took place at Brighton Festival and involved the designer Philip Steadman, who had placed particular emphasis in the field of kinetic art and concrete poetry. As well as, in London, the ICA’s ‘Electric Theatre’ (1971) and Hayward Gallery’s ‘Kinetic Art’ (1970)*,* where I presented *Visual Homeostatic Information* (1969–70). I found myself positioned and presented as a kinetic artist, which made me feel very uncomfortable because I was doing something quite different. After the show at Hayward, in the early 1970s, I set up the Centre for Behavioural Art at Gallery House, in London, and did the *Cognition Control* project (1972) at the Museum of Modern Art, in Oxford [now Modern Art Oxford], and Midland Group Gallery, in Nottingham. Around that period, education became part of my life again. I taught in Fine Art Departments, full time at Nottingham College of Art and Design [now Nottingham Trent University] and as visiting lecturer in universities across Exeter, Hornsey, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool and Newport. I also worked part time at Leicester Polytechnic [now De Montfort University] where I contributed to the ‘Invention of Problems’ symposium they were running in 1971. There were interesting things happening in the Midlands in the early 1970s and, specifically, there was a group of people concerned with what we now call digital art.

**PA:** Are there any specific individuals who were based in the UK that have influenced or supported your practice, or who you consider to have made key contributions to the UK digital art ecosystem?

**SW:** To be truthful, I made it because I had this fortunate experience of meeting all these artists very early on. I didn't really look to any other people for models; I thought I could make my own and did not want to emulate anyone else. Creating and working on *The Social Resource Projects* (1972–3), *The Edinburgh Social Model Construction Project* (1973) or *Visual Meta Language Simulation* (1971–2), and later *Meta Filter* (1973–5)*,* was thrilling because nobody's ever done anything like that before. I believe art should create precedents and move on. Of course, I have met many people throughout my life, especially in the early 1970s when we set up the Centre of Behavioural Art at Gallery House. We had people from different disciplines like the mathematician Robert Bell and George Mallen presenting papers and I met European and Latin American artists. 

**PA:** We have spoken about some of the communities and groups in the UK that you have been part of, from counter-culture to CAS and the Auto-destructive art group. Could you expand on these and other art communities in the UK and globally that you belong to, that have been influential to the development of your practice?

**SW:** I was very much involved with innovative artists and thinkers that found themselves at the margins of the art world but nevertheless were setting the agenda for the years to come, such as concrete poets, and performance, digital and cybernetic artists. I thought at the time that we were part of a ‘counter consciousness’. 

Conversely, I had a lot of problems getting people to understand what I was doing. For example, I thought the work of art did not need the authorship of the artist to transmit meaning. So my work was anonymous. It was process- and event-based instead of object-based. All of these meant that I ended up marginalizing myself from the world of objects and the art market. This became a real problem when, around 1973, I found myself completely locked out of the institutional art world. I decided then to embark on work that would change the way art galleries operated by bringing into there inner real problems that mattered for people in the world outside. I wrote a paper in 1973 called *The Artist as an Instigator of Changes in Social Cognition and Behaviour,* which* presented different models of art operating simultaneously in society. For example, you have educational and remedial art, and all of these models have different languages. 

Around this period, I began *The Edinburgh Social Model Construction Project* (1973),* which was made in collaboration with four communities in that city. There was a group of five project operators in each area that went and knocked on people’s doors to introduce the project and distribute a problem sheet in the morning about the way people saw their environment and how they could change it. Around five o’clock each afternoon, they gathered all the sheets and took them to the ICL Centre to upload all the information into mainframe computers. Then the program looked for consensus tendencies within the information and the results were used to produce the following day’s problem situation which meant that we had a very quick series of feedback loops. This exercise lasted for a week, and it was starting to bring people together and to showcase consensus between the communities on how society could function. 

After this experience, we realized we could go further and we introduced the project to people passing by, more casual audiences that could intervene directly and add their own responses to the consensus tendencies that were created by a program within a computer terminal outside on the pavement of Princes Street. The computer looked pretty ugly by today’s standards, but people could appreciate and enjoy the unique experience of sitting down on a computer terminal on the street and, responding in a matter of seconds, the machine would start displaying the changes you had produced within the main consensus. This was a profound and powerful experience for people. I see this work as an interface between the analogue qualities of people’s lives and that of digital programming of social situations. The program was constructed by Stuart Pound who is a very famous programmer and concrete poet, and was also a member of CAS.

**PA:** As a practitioner with expertise in the field of cybernetics, could you outline some of the key technologies and tools that have made your practice possible?   

**SW:** In terms of technology, I did the physical fabrication of the works myself. Chris Grimshaw designed the circuits to my specifications, but then I had to solder them up on circuit boards. Over time, this experience made me an expert at doing this type of work. I was working with really good people, advanced thinkers of the time and marrying the language of their disciplines into the building of a responsive artwork and by doing so, creating a meta-language between the machine and human consciousness. The actual programming tended to be machine language and grey coding. When we came to *The Edinburgh Social Model Construction Project,* we used the programming language Fortran which relies on machine coding. So, we were actually building dedicated computers from scratch until the work *Free Zone* (1997) where we decided to use a general computer and we customized it by installing our own program of instructions. 

Financially, in the main, I funded the work myself. I did not want to institutionalize it because I always thought the artist should be free. When we did the work on social simulations, I spent many months working with local people and for most of these projects I set up advisory panels of experts from all sorts of disciplines like advertising, architecture, cybernetics, mathematics, philosophy and arts.
