---
title: "Interview: William Latham"
layout: essay
order: 800
---
William Latham (b. 1961, United Kingdom) is a visual artist, computer scientist and computer games designer who applies evolutionary theory to art making. He is well known for his work *Mutator* (1989–present), an evolutionary software system that generates variations of organic life in 3D forms. Early iterations of *Mutator* can be found in his works created at IBM – *Colid Horn (Twist 5*) (1987), *Tube 1* (1987) and *Twister 1* (1988) – which are part of the V&A’s Digital Art Collection. 

**Pita Arreola:** Could we begin with your earliest encounters with digital art and how you came to incorporate certain methodologies and technologies into your practice?

**William Latham:** I grew up in a village near the Harwell Atomic Research Centre, in Oxfordshire. My family and all our friends were scientists who worked there using software, computers and, of course, mathematics. This had a big influence on me. Right from the start, I was thinking about technology and molecular diagrams. My father was an industrial chemist, so I was very familiar with molecular imagery and that set me in a particular direction. 

When I went to the Ruskin School of Art at the University of Oxford in 1979, the students were fortunate enough to be allowed to explore the various departments, so I would go and work in the Physics Department and also the Computer Department. 

It was at the Oxford University Computing Department that I first came across and used plotters and programming in Fortran 77. I started then to be aware of what was happening in the software space, particularly with artificial intelligence (AI) systems, like ELIZA. Even though computers were very limited, a lot of interesting work was being developed.

In 1982, I went to study a master’s degree at the Royal College of Art (RCA), in London, and I had the opportunity to connect with a wider group of people. 

**PA:** You also took contemporary dance classes while you were a student at the Ruskin School of Art.

**WL:** Yes, that was a big event. Arlette Bonne, who was over from the USA, was running a workshop at the Museum of Modern Art Oxford [now Modern Art Oxford]. She got us walking, tracing out choreographic paths, in particular moving in geometric patterns. As the group walked along these paths, you would see patterns that emerged. After that, I took those ideas into drawings, which reflected these choreographic paths in 2D and then I pulled them up into 3D. In this way, they became three dimensional objects that were rule-based but inspired by choreography. Until that point, I'd been doing paintings in the style of Francis Bacon. I threw all that away, and then became much more interested in Russian Constructivism and rule-based art. Kenneth Martin taught me there; he was applying dice throwing to generate a drawing system. I had an immediate affinity with the beautiful drawings he produced. 

**PA:** Some of those ideas can be seen in your work *Spiral Balsa Wood Structure* (1982), which is part of the V&A collection.

**WL**: That work links directly back to that dance class. It is a record of the dance patterns in 3D. That was a key moment of change for my work, and I stuck with that track until I got to the RCA. Then I met a new set of lecturers: artists like Patrick Heron, John Hoyland and Alistair Grant. They were quite challenging, and they pushed me to do something novel again. 

**PA:** During your time at the RCA, was the work of your peers influential or were people there dedicated to other types of art? And were there connections between the school and industry at that time?

**WL:** I was quite isolated at that time because my colleagues were doing paintings in the style of Julian Schnabel, and I was doing these obsessive patterned drawings using rule-based systems. I found little in common there with my fellow students, but I was lucky to be working with the artist Keith Critchlow. And the artist Eduardo Paolozzi was a big influence on me there. He was one of my main mentors. I still think about some of the advice he gave me. The RCA had a Computing Department; the artist Brian Reffin Smith and architect John Lansdown were attached to it. That department was ahead of its time. During that time, I often visited the Natural History Museum, in London, and spent time at the V&A looking at Tantric art and mandala imagery.

From about 1985 to ‘87, I was doing a PhD with John Lansdown and Keith Critchlow, working with a very good programmer called Mike King, who helped me translate my ideas into software. Around that time, Lansdown hosted meetings at the Computer Arts Society (CAS) in Covent Garden. They were great events, and I became part of that community. The artist Paul Brown was heavily involved with CAS. He gave me a part-time teaching job at Middlesex Polytechnic [now Middlesex University]. At that point, the computer graphics scene in London was beginning to take off. Lansdown had done the 1979 *Alien* film intro. Other key figures of the community were the artists Chris Briscoe and John Vince, who wrote a software package called PICASSO that many production houses were using for special effects. And there was the interaction designer Gillian Crampton Smith who was at the RCA. It was a very small and thriving community of people in London involved with computer software and graphics. 

In 1987, I got an invitation from IBM that I followed up with a call. By chance, I got the nuclear physicist Peter Quarendon on the phone and he invited me to IBM in Winchester to show my drawings to Stephen Todd and five other engineers. I went there with my 10-foot drawings and explained the rules that I was applying. Three months later, they invited me to be an artist in residence with the programming team using new software coded in the Energy System Modelling Environment (ESME) and ray tracing. In a Renaissance fashion, IBM created a scientific centre where people from different disciplines worked together. I was at IBM Winchester for six years and during that time I lost contact with the London art scene. But I started to work more internationally. I went abroad to the conferences organized by the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques (SIGGRAPH) and IMAGINA in Monte Carlo, which was an annual festival and big hub of computer graphics in that region. I had the solo exhibition ‘Empire of Form’ in 1990 at the O Art Museum, in Tokyo, where I spent time with the artist Yoichiro Kawaguchi. At that time, there were no PCs around, so artists had to operate in the corporate space to gain access to big machines. Companies were looking for people who would generate research and enhance their reputation by showing off the capability of their hardware and software. 

**PA:** Since early on in your career, you have taken part in different events and exhibitions such as the ‘State-of-the-art in Computer Animation’ conference (1986) organized by BCS Computer Graphics & Display Group and CAS, at The Royal College of Art, and ‘The Conquest of Form’ exhibition at Arnolfini gallery, in Bristol (1988–9). 

Could you tell us about the events that were both memorable and important in establishing the digital art scene that your practice originates from, or that further raised the profile of your community of practice? 

**WL:** SIGGRAPH was a big influence. Film companies premiered feature films at the conferences. People like Jinn Blinn, Alan Nolte Milton, Manuel Brock, Ken Perlin and Yoichiro Kawaguchi were presenting papers there. And it had an art show running in parallel to the conference. With IBM backing me, I was able to attend every year. In 1989, I showed my 35mm film *A Sequence from the Evolution of Form*. These events helped me to gain international recognition and to connect with incredible innovators whose technology is still used today. 

The catch was that as soon as you got involved with technology and corporations, the art world did not like it. My work was increasing in popularity during the early 1990s and being shown in the scientific domain, at the Natural History Museum, in London, and the Deutsches Museum, in Munich. At that time, there was a lot of enmity between the art world and the computer graphics scene. Not like now – they really did not like computer art at all. 

**PA:** Around the period these events took place, what specific vocabulary was being used to describe digital art? 

**WL:** There was no specific terminology and that was always a problem. It was always a bit casual. People called it either ‘computer art’ or sometimes ‘computer graphics’. And definitely using the word ‘graphics’ wasn't good, as it implied a lower rung in the hierarchy. On top of that, the audience was questioning whether the creativity was coming from the artist or the software. There was a lot of friction between practitioners working with technology and the art world, and it has taken almost 30 years for that reconciliation to happen. It’s only now that most of the population in the UK are using PCs or technology that the audience has become more sympathetic to the challenges embedded to technological tools and its associated themes. 

**PA:** Over the years, you have collaborated with different individuals across the UK and internationally, including John Lansdown, Paul Brown, Stephen Todd, Mark Ayres, Frederic Fol Leymarie and Mike Sternberg. Could you tell us about these collaborations and the expertise they have brought to your practice?   

**WL:** Over the years, I have collaborated closely with Stephen Todd, and later with Professor Frederic Fol Leymarie from Goldsmiths’ College [now Goldsmiths, University of London]. There are some collaborations where I am working with individuals every single day, especially for software-based projects. For example, when I work with Stephen Todd, he writes a piece of software, I try it out and make many comments. He will then review these notes and implement changes. We work within a very tight feedback loop. In fact, with programmers and mathematicians, the quicker you can provide feedback, the better because they often work very quickly and thrive on that speed. Many of my collaborations are framed by software development methods where you are working together to engineer the software. My role includes setting deadlines based on the opening of exhibitions and projects.

Mike Sternberg is the director of the Centre for Integrative Systems Biology and Bioinformatics at Imperial College London, with interest in the field of cancer and protein docking. He had one of my works at his home and Frederic introduced us. During that conversation he mentioned the way my forms are structured has some similarities with the beta-sheet structure in protein molecules and he suggested applying the technology I was using in their scientific problems. After that, Stephen Todd and his son Peter got involved in the project. They are both incredible programmers and they found a way to adapt our software to Stenberg’s scientific research. The challenge with these types of collaborations is that they are labelled as science and never art. But when you, as an artist, work with science, the ideas get pulled back into your art. You can see this particularly with the virus work we did with Professor Reidun Twarock at the University of York where we learnt so much about capsid shells but ultimately found ourselves viewing them in aesthetic terms. In a way, it is similar to the process of drawing from nature to create a painting, although we are looking at nature on a molecular level. Ultimately, the art that is produced is abstract but it is informed by molecular perspective. 

Additionally, throughout my career, there have been key support figures like Professor Robert Zimmer, who was Head of Computing at Goldsmiths for eight years. He was very caring and created a good environment that enabled the formation of a strong community in the university. The scientist Margaret A. Boden is a big champion of artificial intelligence and she encouraged me and backed my work.

Another significant figure was the Surrealist painter Roberto Matta who bought some of my work. I visited his studio in Paris, and we were together in a panel conversation for the IMAGINA festival about computers and Surrealist art in 1990. Matta was trained as an architect, so structure and form are core elements of his work. He also applied chance to his painting practice which was a popular theme within Surrealist ideologies. They used the dice to generate random numbers and I applied – and still apply – random number generators to create *Mutator*. 

Paolozzi, who I mentioned earlier, had a significant impact on me when he was my professor at the RCA. I wasn’t working with him on a daily basis, but he was always challenging me. He would often advise me to leave art school and work in the computer software environment to make a living. I learned from Paolozzi that you should pursue what interests you and not care about whatever everyone else thinks.

**PA:** Are there other individuals based in the UK who have influenced or supported your practice, or who you consider have made key contributions to the UK digital art ecosystem?

**WL:** Jasia Reichardt obviously, who curated the first computer art exhibition in the UK, ‘Cybernetic Serendipity’, at the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA), London, back in 1968 (and celebrated in a retrospective a few months ago). I got to know her and her work many years later after her audacious debut, but she remained and remains a powerful force within this area and has always been supportive of my work. Although not in the UK, the Experiments in Art and Technology (E.A.T.) group in New York, also from the late ’60s, was very influential. Barry Barker, who was the director of the Arnolfini, and Stephen Snoddy, who was a curator there, were big advocates for my work. The support from the V&A has been really good over the years. And the Henry Moore Institute, in Leeds, backed my work too; I was a Henry Moore scholar at the RCA. In fact, I knew Henry Moore quite well. The team at Gazelli Art House and Valentina Ravaglia, Curator of Displays and International Art at Tate Modern, both in London, have provided incredible support during the last year. 

Outside of the UK, I should also mention Frédéric Migayrou, Deputy Director of the Centre Pompidou, in Paris, and Anna Frants, Director of CYFEST: International Media Art Festival, which is hosted in a different city every year.

**PA:** Throughout your career, you have been part of groups and social formations that have existed within and beyond the UK, contributing to the development of the digital arts. For example, CAS and the computing community at Goldsmiths. Could you expand on these and other digital art communities in the UK and globally that you belong to, which have been influential to the development of your practice?

**WL:** Cyber was a key counter-culture movement. When I finished at IBM, my audience was not mainstream, it was formed by people who were going to raves, dancing to music and watching my work. All my videos had been bootlegged and were projected in huge garages and factories. This is why I went from IBM to the entertainment industry where I worked with different record labels and music bands, like the famous Scottish psychedelic band The Shamen. After that, Warner Brothers approached me to do art inspired by organic life. Then I drifted into the video game industry for almost 10 years and ended up directing a big studio of around 70 people where we created games that at the time were visually quite cutting-edge. 

During the 1990s, people who were doing interesting work tended to either become academics or go into cyber culture. This cultural moment was characterized by a celebratory attitude towards technology with figures like Bruce Sterling and William Gibson working on the genre of cyberpunk. It was quite similar to the moment we are living now with artificial intelligence being in the public eye. Culturally, the 1990s was a very exciting period with a lot of excitement around the internet, rave music and sampling.

In 2004, Mick Grierson, Janis Jefferies and Frederic Fol Leymarie formed the Digital Arts Computing course at Goldsmiths (Grierson would later go on to set up the Creative Computing Institute at University of the Arts London). I was invited around that time to help build that group. Goldsmiths became a centre for computer art and computational creativity with a strong critical mass composed of the teaching staff and PhD students. Goldsmiths had a push on virtual and augmented reality, alongside medical work. It continues to operate today as a strong cluster for innovation.  

Regarding these digital communities, Middlesex Polytechnic was a hub for computer art in the 1990s. John Lansdown and Paul Brown were involved, and I worked there in the early days. The Polytechnic had equipment and hardware like the Quantel Paintbox. Leicester Polytechnic [now De Montfort University] was another cluster with Ernest Edmonds and Sean Clark. Both Brown and Edmonds were influenced by the Systems art group which was formed in London during the 1970s. Another interesting cluster was the National Centre for Computer Animation at Bournemouth University with Peter Comninos and John Vince where they were doing work with film and computer graphics. Gareth Edwards, who studied at the RCA with me, became part of that group. 

**PA:** As a practitioner with expertise in the field of artificial evolutionary systems, could you outline some of the key technologies and tools that have made your practice possible?    

**WL:** I have had the luxury of having access to custom software, which is really important because it gives the work a different look. Some artists are using Unreal or Photoshop and you can spot the aesthetics; it is the same with programs like Midjourney or DALL-E. That is the reason why I have always pushed on using customized technology. In the early days, I did work for the BBC using BBC BASIC and BBC microcomputers. I used Fortran 77 for the work I developed when studying at Oxford.

When I was at IBM, we were using proprietary software, and a language called Extensible Solid Modelling Editor (ESME). There was also WINSOM, a Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) modelling package which allowed you to do Boolean operators where you could take a sphere and subtract a cube from it in a precise way similar to carving. The forms are very defined because you utilize spatial subdivisions instead of polygons, and the cuts are applied to individual pixels. Chris Briscoe and John Vince’s PICASSO interactive graphics modelling program was very good for handcrafting during the 1980s. 

Historically, I have tended to only use the software I have developed with my collaborators. At the moment, I am using tools like Geiger pixels where you can take an image and increase its resolution. Virtual reality (VR) is very important for my work. We mainly use HTC Vive PCs which run the experience in real time at 90 frames per second. VR is a new tool and art form where, if the work operates successfully, you can conceptually shift the audience’s spatial reality. In VR, the audience ceases to be merely an observer and becomes part of the artwork, which is very powerful from an engagement point of view.  

**PA:** We have discussed some of the references of your work such as Surrealism, Tantric art and nature. It would also be interesting to hear more about the thinkers and theoretical concepts that have helped shape your work.

**WL:** Conceptually, once the software has been built, the computer becomes a creative partner. In this scenario, there is an evolutionary interface between the artist and the software. Once you fine-tune the software, it can be quite addictive to play with the systems, because you never know what these will give back to you. I find this part of the work very enjoyable and that is what makes me ready to spend hours developing the theory that will deliver that experience. My motivation is the fascination with the potential and limitations of human creativity and the generative power of the machine. Theoretically, my work goes back to classical Greek thinking about solid geometry, perspective, mathematics, and the celebration of mathematics and arts. The work can be a bit contentious, as it contains Freudian elements and deliberately tries to play with people’s fears, showcasing bugs and worms at a microscopic perspective, though as well as being uncanny, it’s often quite humorous. The biologist and mathematician D'Arcy Thompson is a big influence on me, as is Leonardo da Vinci’s idea of illusionary depth and use of perspective. 
