---
title: "Interview: Ernest Edmonds"
layout: essay
order: 600
---

Ernest Edmonds (b. 1942, United Kingdom) is an artist recognized as an early innovative figure of computer art. Underpinned by the Concrete and Constructivist traditions, his practice investigates how human perception and cognitive processes evolve over time within exchanges between humans and technological systems. Edmonds’ interactive work *Shaping Forms 14/07/2007* (2007) demonstrates these ideas and is part of the V&A’s Digital Art Collection. 

………

**Pita Arreola:** Reflecting on the beginning of your career, could you elaborate on your earliest encounters with computer art and how you came to incorporate certain methodologies and technologies into your practice?  

**Ernest Edmonds:** I decided that I wanted to be an artist when I was a schoolboy, but the art schools of that day were not helpful for what I wanted to do. My friends that had gone to art school were not very enthusiastic about it. Long story short, I decided to do a mathematics degree which I found easy, so I had lots of time to paint. When I studied at the University of Leicester, the head of mathematics was a brilliant logician, so I got into logic. He introduced me to philosophy, and I ended up interested in the philosophy of mathematics and went to do a PhD in logic at the University of Nottingham, submitted in 1973. The branch of logic that I was concerned with was computation, so that helped me understand the logical underpinning of computer science and Alan Turing’s work. 

That is my background, but to answer your question, in 1967 I took a job as a research assistant in mathematics at what soon became the Leicester Polytechnic [now De Montfort University]. One year into my project, I noticed that we had a computer, so I decided to play with it and taught myself to program. I found that I could write programs to solve issues that were helpful for the research I was doing in logic. My research assistantship was uncertain as it had to be renewed yearly, and the head of the department told me about a lectureship in computing that would be a more permanent role, so I became a computer scientist by accident. I tried to do something that was interesting to me, and started applying computers to art and design. But in those days you could not say that you were doing computer art, because people would be dismissive, so I tried to label it all as ‘design support’.

**PA:** Previously you commented on computer art having antecedents in other artistic movements, such as Constructivism and Concrete art. It would be good to hear your thoughts on that. I know, for example, that Constructivism has been very influential on your work and thinking. 

**EE:** Without question,** I consider that the Constructivist tradition was really the artistic direction that led to what we are discussing now and if you read the writings of the people at the University of Stuttgart from the 1960s, you'll see that this tradition was very influential. If we look at the UK scene in the 1940s, it turned out to be crucial because there was a group of artists before computers that were applying procedures to make their art. In particular, the artists Kenneth and Mary Martin and others around them. They devised the procedure that generated the art. The physical appearance of the artwork wasn’t something that the artist decided, the aesthetics emerged from decisions about the procedures. Kenneth once said to me that he wished he was younger because then he could have used computers. 

Following those artists, a group, including some of their students, formed the Systems Group. The ‘Systems’  exhibition (1972)  at Whitechapel Gallery, curated by Nicholas Serota, featured the work of the group and toured across the UK including to Leicester. These artists often used mathematics and geometry as the baseline for their work. The artists Malcolm Hughes and Jeffrey Steele were key in putting together the group. In a way, their work was directly leading towards using software for making art and it is important to note the vision 

they had. Jeffrey was lecturing at Portsmouth Polytechnic and proposed in the late 1960s buying a computer for the Art Department but failed to persuade them. However, a few years later, Malcolm succeeded in convincing the Slade School of Fine Art, in London, to buy a computer. Neither Malcolm nor Jeffrey were computer programmers, but they thought this was important for the future. Malcolm started the Experimental Department at the Slade in 1972.  

During the 1960s, there were many events across the world that catalyzed the use of computers in the arts. In 1965, the mathematician George Nees and computer scientist Frieder Nake presented their computer art in the exhibition ‘computer grafik’ at the University of Stuttgart. That year, the Howard Wise Gallery in New York showed the work of the neuroscientist Béla Julesz and engineer A. Michael Noll in the exhibition ‘Computer-Generated Pictures’. From the UK point of view, Jasia Reichardt organized the *‘*Cybernetic Serendipity’ show at the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA) in London during 1968. Before that, she had met the philosopher Max Bense who taught at the University of Stuttgart, and proposed that the future were computers. The Computer Arts Society (CAS) was also formed in August that year. 

In terms of my own work, at that time I was moving from making art that was about abstractions to the abstract. By abstractions, I mean using elements like landscapes or flowers, whereas in the abstract work, I was interested in more geometric and minimalistic forms of the Constructivist tradition. In 1968, I had just taught myself how to write computer programs. I decided to make an artwork that summarized what I had been doing in the previous ten years. The work is titled *Nineteen* (1968–9) and it is composed of 20 square reliefs. I was finding it difficult to decide how to arrange the composition. I realized that I could write down the rules and use them to write a computer program to work out the arrangement. It turned out that it was practically difficult to do this, because Leicester Polytechnic only had one computer. But I managed to get three hours with the computer to run my program and find a solution. 

I wanted to use spray paint to apply colour in my compositions to avoid brush marks. I was looking for help to do this and crossed the road to the Art Department where I found the artist Stroud Cornock in charge of a spray booth. He helped me with the painting but he was more interested in the fact that I was using a computer program to work out the compositional arrangement. He had previously been working with the artist Roy Ascott and was inspired by these new technologies. After that, we became good friends and collaborators. 

**PA:** I know you worked with Stroud Cornock on several projects, including *DataPack* (1970). Could you tell us about this collaboration and the development it brought to your practice?

**EE:** In 1969, Stroud and I wrote the paper ‘The Creative Process Where the Artist is Amplified or Superseded by the Computer’*,* which we saw as a manifesto. We presented it in 1970 and it was published in the journal *Leonardo* in 1973. One of our key points was that the future of art with computers would be interactive. This was before the personal computer. That year, 1970, we had the opportunity to show *DataPack* in the ‘Computer Graphics 70’ exhibition. They hosted the show alongside the conference, and we thought it would be an ideal space to present the type of interactive artwork we proposed in our paper presented at that conference. We designed and built the piece. It would not look too exciting today, but it was what was possible with the technology of that time. It demonstrated the potential of interactive art where you turned the audience into a participatory element of the creative process and gave them agency to influence the work. *DataPack* used a teletype allowing typed data to be sent to a computer. The participants used the teletype to have a ‘conversation’ with the computer. The computer program I wrote used the data from the conversation to draw an image in response to the individual interaction utilizing a graph plotter which operated a pen, a drawing machine, much different from the typical printers we have nowadays. The images were produced using data from the plans of the Vickers building [now known as the Millbank Tower], next to Tate Modern. The program allocated space inside or around the building based on the conversation. The work was called *DataPack* because we gave each participant a plastic folder with a copy of their dialogue and the image that was generated especially for them. 

**PA:** Can you tell me about your work *Communications Games* (1971) from around that time?

**EE:** I was very interested in the fact that the computer provided me with new ideas and ways to make art. I did not think of it as a tool, but as a new medium that opened opportunities to look at new art forms. I was also interested in psychology and systems theory. For *Communications Game*, I started to investigate psychology and to learn about language, communication methods and behaviour. In this work, I saw the opportunity to produce a networked experience where several people could interact with one another through the artwork. It was before the internet, so I designed an electronic circuit which I physically assembled to produce a network of six stations for the participants. The challenge of just using lights and switches for the interactions was to enable it to feel meaningful rather than random. I built later versions for exhibitions in 1973 and beyond. Later versions were shown, for example, in 1990 in ‘Art Creating Society’ at what used to be called the Museum of Modern Art, Oxford, and in 2015 in ‘Primary Codes’ at Oi! Futuro, Rio de Janeiro.

**PA:** Do you consider some of these ideas to be applicable to more recent interactive works, such as *Shaping Form* (2007), which is in the V&A’s Digital Art Collection?

<a name="_heading=h.gjdgxs"></a>**EE:** Looking back at the early days, we considered interaction in relation to systems theory and biology, where an interaction can change internal states as well as direct behaviour. However, by the early 2000s most interactive art was based on action response, which is more related to game models. Contradicting this trend, I decided that I wanted to make artworks that dealt with the first type of interaction, so I started the *Shaping Form* series (2007–12). These works are composed of two main parts. The first one is a camera, which detects movement, connected to a computer (some versions can pick up on sound or other aspects of the environment). And the second one is a screen that presents the audience with a generative visual experience, including a response to their presence. The work at the V&A was the first one I did. The main principle of the work is that the computer keeps track of the movement, and in response, it is constantly readjusting the rules that generate the image sequence. It is a rule-based generative work which can produce an infinite number of different arrangements of shapes and colours, evolving as a result of participant interaction. 

More recently, I have been working on extensions of *Communications Game*, utilizing the internet and ideas from *Shaping Form*: *the* *Cities Tango* series. For example, in 2021, I developed a piece for the British Pavilion in the Dubai Expo that connected that space with the streets of Leicester. I used cameras and screens to create one station in each location, so people from Dubai could interact with the people in Leicester through colour and images. In this work, the audience keeps influencing the work as the program continues to learn and evolve over time. Most of my recent work links interactive art with communication technologies.

**PA:** Conceptually, artificial intelligence has played an important role in your work, and you have written extensively about this topic. These themes can be found in the *Shaping Form* series and in your collaborative work with the cognitive scientist Margaret A. Boden. It would be fantastic to hear more about this collaboration. 

**EE:** Artificial intelligence (AI) is integral to much of my work; even just the analysis of people’s movement is using AI techniques, and the evolutionary aspect of the work relates to AI in a bigger sense. I do not just mean machine learning, in the modern world these concepts often get confused.



I have expanded on this work and collaborated with other people interested in the topic, such as Margaret Boden. In 2019, Maggie and I published the book *From Fingers to Digits. An Artificial Aesthetic* to address the use of software and AI in computer art. We first met in a remote and lovely place in Australia, Lamington National Park, where we both presented at a conference on creativity. We frequently talked. She came and spent time in Australia with me, and I often went to Sussex where she was professor of cognitive science at the university. We had a very strong mutual interest in creativity and AI. I was interested in amplifying human creativity and Maggie was interested in modelling creativity, so we started to do some writing together. In 2009, we published an article ‘What Is Generative Art?’* in the *Digital Creativity* journal,* and we decided to write a book together. It took a long time, but you can see in that 2019 publication that we agreed on many issues related to AI. We were part of the same circle. Although she is not an artist, she was very closely connected with the art world. We had many friends in common, including the artist Harold Cohen. She is really a philosopher, although she is more famously known as a cognitive scientist. In her writing, you can see how she has applied her interest in philosophy to computer science. 

Apart from AI, colour is another key element in my work. I found that with computing I was able to build computational systems that controlled colour. When I worked at Loughborough University in the 1990s, some of my colleagues were researching colour for commercial purposes and working with companies such as Marks & Spencer to establish computational methods that dealt with how colour was perceived. And I was able to draw from this research and start looking at colour computationally from a perceptual psychology perspective.  

**PA:** Throughout your career, you have been part of groups and social organizations within and beyond the UK that have contributed to the development of the digital arts, for example CAS. Could you talk about these and other digital-art communities in the UK and globally that have been influential to the development of your practice?

**EE:** Stroud Cornock and I formed an informal group in Leicester towards the end of the 1960s and brought in various active artists from elsewhere. But the first formal organization that I joined was CAS and, in fact, Stroud and I gave a talk at one of their 1970 meetings about what we were doing in Leicester. CAS has been an important community, both nationally and internationally. I have already mentioned *Leonardo*. The community associated with that journal has been, and still is, an important one; enabling publications, encouraging debate and interchange. Art communities that I belonged to that took a serious interest in the use of computers without focusing on it included Exhibiting Space, a London artist-led group initiated by the artist Ray Thomson, and the PRO Foundation based in the Netherlands and led by artist and curator Fré Ilgen. These two communities originated very interesting dialogues between artists using computers and others who worked in the Constructivist tradition, often employing mathematics. The first International Symposium on Electronic Art was held in Utrecht in 1988 and I contributed to it. This led to a series of regular symposia, with the shortened title of ISEA International, that still operates today and had formed a significant community, overlapping with CAS. It is run by a formal foundation with a legal base in the Netherlands. Another community, which is strongly multi-disciplinary and includes computer scientists, cognitive scientists and others interested in creativity as well as computer-based artists, is based on the Association for Computing Machinery’s (ACM) Creativity and Cognition (C&C) conference series, which I founded in 1993 with Linda Candy. As with ISEA, this is also lively today.

**PA:** We talked about your early collaboration with Stroud Cornock, but your involvement with these communities must have led to other partnerships.

**EE:** Yes, very much so. I have often collaborated, sometimes technically, with other artists. For example, on performances with Mark Fell, whose work is grounded in electronic music, and on distributed interaction with Sean Clark, who currently chairs CAS. There have been many others, including PhD students who are often as much collaborators as students. I am currently working with Jonathan Knoblauch, who is an expert on quantum computing. All these collaborations help to keep moving on. And the communities I mentioned are also still important to me. We still have CAS, *Leonardo*, ISEA, C&C and other groups pressing ahead as communities advancing the computer-based arts. Of course, all of these are specialist groups. In the UK, the V&A recognized, and started collecting, computer-based art quite some time ago, but public bodies have mostly been slow to follow that lead. However, we can now see significant examples of integration into the mainstream, both in the commercial and the public sectors.
