---
title: "Interview: John Lifton"
layout: essay
order: 1000
---

John Lifton (b. 1944, United Kingdom) is an artist and theorist whose work explores the relationships between art, science, the environment and technology. In 1968, he co-founded the Institute for Research in Art and Technology in London (IRAT, also known as the New Arts Lab), a pivotal space for the avant-garde art scene that enabled experimentation in film, video, sculpture and literature. 

**Pita Arreola:** Reflecting on the beginning of your career, could you elaborate on your earliest encounters with computer art and how you came to incorporate certain methodologies and technologies into your practice?

**John Lifton:** Growing up, I had a particular disposition towards analogue and mechanical tools, but to properly answer your question I have to go back to my mother’s influence. She was born in Argentina, of British parents. My grandfather had migrated with his family from Devonshire as a teenager. He was a very bright guy and got a job on the building of a railroad system from scratch with a contract underwritten by the British and Argentine governments. He ended up doing surveys to determine where the lines would go and contributing towards the design of the stations, depots, even writing the timetables. I think my mother wanted me to be like him. I saw him as a Renaissance man of the First Machine Age.

The Second World War was just over when I was little, so my mother wanted me to have a great education for the post-war world. As an amateur painter, she started taking me to museums and galleries in London when I was 18 months old, and I loved it. We lived in Northwood on the Metropolitan Line, and we could get into the city centre in little over half an hour. We would spend the whole day looking at museums and have lunch at Lyons’ Corner House. My favourite outing was the British Museum and especially the Egyptian collection from which I developed a lifelong love of Egyptology. So, my interest in art, tools and machinery was deeply embedded in me by about the age of five and continued all my life. I was also incredibly interested in seeing buildings under construction, and I'm told I announced at five that I would be an architect when I grew up.

Later, I went to the Merchant Taylors' School which was at Moor Park, nearby. I was the only student who had a special dispensation to trade out some of the science time to work in the art studio. Even then, I insisted on doing both art and science. I don't know when I first came across computer art; it hardly existed as a category back then. Most people, if you mentioned computer art, would give you a totally blank look as it didn't mean anything. At that time, I was thinking of an artist’s studio as a place extended to include design and the construction of electronics and computing equipment. The other people that I knew with a similar perspective were musicians, because electronics had penetrated music more than other areas of the arts. 

{% 'image_01_owen_jones' %}

**PA:** Since early in your career, you have taken part in different events and exhibitions such as ‘Cybernetic Serendipity’ (1968) at the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA); and ’Event One’ (1969) at Royal College of Art (RCA), both in London; ‘INTERACT. Machine: Man: Society’ (1973), organized by the Computer Arts Society (CAS) for the Edinburgh International Festival; and ‘Green Music’ (1975) at Whitechapel Gallery, in London. Could you tell us about these and other events that were both memorable and important in establishing the digital art scene or circle that your practice originates from? And which helped raise the profile of that community?

**JL:** At that time there were very few people working in this area and they were all over Britain. Some were concentrated in London, but it still was a tiny group. Most people that I knew who were involved in computer art were always struggling to get an hour or two on a computer. When I look back at the people that my wife Pamela Zoline and I knew back then, they were artists such as Joe Tilson, Ron Kitaj and Richard Hamilton. Their work did not focus on computer art, but they were interested in the broader spectrum of what was going on in the arts. 

I was heavily involved in the founding of the New Arts Lab at Robert Street, in London, in 1968, and got to know the composer Hugh Davies who oversaw music there. We were close friends and in 1970 we started a music performance group called Naked Software with the composer Annea Lockwood and producer Harvey Matusow. We toured around the country with two hundred instruments that we used for our improvisations during the performances. 

{% 'image_02_john_lifton' %}

**PA:** Around the period these events took place, what specific vocabulary was being used to describe digital art? It would be good to hear about them given how terminologies have been used and changed across different periods.    

**JL:** The term ‘cybernetics’ was very commonly used back then. I think I learned about it from the cybernetician George Mallen who had got it from the cybernetician Gordon Pask. The second term is ‘symbiotic art’ which I proposed myself in discussions I had with the writer and systems engineer Jonathan Benthall in 1969. I thought the term provided a good description of the work I was doing which was aiming to generate real-time behavioural interaction between people and artworks. Jonathan made that term public in an article he published in the art magazine *Studio International* in June 1969. I still see it used occasionally, but with a different intent. Generally, ‘computer art’ was a huge general term which swallowed everything.

**PA:** Over the years, you have collaborated with different individuals across the UK and abroad including Richard Lowenberg, John Lansdown, David Curtis and Carolee Schneemann. Could you tell us about these collaborations and the expertise they have brought to your practice?   

**JL:** There were two quite different art movements that I was lucky to be deeply involved with in the mid-to-late ‘60s. And neither of them were style movements. The first was the Computer Arts Society (CAS). At the time it was formed, its goal was to promote the creative use of computers in the arts and to encourage the interchange of information in this area. As I can remember, it was my friend, the artist Gustav Metzger, who told me that CAS had been formed the previous week and gave me John Lansdown's contact information. I went to John’s office the next day and signed up, becoming among the eight early members. That was the start of a period when I worked closely with CAS and often provided labour to help with their activities. For several years, the society ran regular meetings and there would be additional meetings when someone of interest was in town. These meetings were held at John’s architectural office in Bloomsbury during the early years. 

The other art movement that I was involved with was the Arts Labs. Jim Haynes, who created it, was an American who had moved to Edinburgh in the late 1950s and founded Britain’s first paperback bookshop, which he ran like his personal salon in the manner of an eighteenth-century coffee house where people gathered for a conversation or commerce. People met and talked all day, every day, and he was there talking to them. He was very skillful at this, and he had a huge effect on things. The Paperback Bookshop staged plays on a small scale and that led Jim to found the Traverse Theatre in Edinburgh during 1962. He moved to London in 1964 and opened the first Arts Lab in Drury Lane, which was an enlarged version of the salon, but it immediately became a centre of the London art scene for my generation.

**PA:** What do you think brought these different groups of people together?

**JL:** I think there was a mood of change and a sense of leaving the war behind us. We were a new generation that did not have any experience of the war and wanted to do new things. We wanted the art world to be less strictly divided than it had been in the past. We were breaking barriers and mixing things up in order to try new stuff and that was a very dominant feeling for my generation. 

**PA:** Are there other individuals who were based in the UK that have influenced or supported your practice, or whom you consider to have made key contributions to the UK digital art ecosystem?

**JL:** My first full-time job as an architect was working for Hackney Borough Council after graduating from the Bartlett School of Architecture, at University College London in 1966. The council assigned me a 810,000 square metre area of mid-Victorian housing called De Beauvoir Town to do a redevelopment study as part of their long-term planning. I think it was during the spring of 1967 when I was walking around the area with a colleague, and he mentioned I needed to meet someone. He took me into a rundown garage and introduced me to the cybernetic sculptor Edward Ihnatowicz working on his piece *Sound Activated Mobile* (SAM) which Ihnatowicz later showed at the ‘Cybernetic Serendipity’ exhibition at the ICA in 1968. We instantly became friends and I found many excuses to drop by and see him during my work day. He was a great inspiration to me because of his dedication and single-mindedness. I have no idea how he made a living because he seemed to be working full-time on his sculptural work. Seeing him made me consider for the first time whether I could stop working in architectural offices and become a professional computer artist. 

Shortly after this, a rebellion at the Drury Lane Arts Lab happened. I was part of the breakaway group that in 1969 created the New Arts Lab, at Robert Street. This group included the author Pamela Zoline, the artist David Curtis and his wife, the artist Biddy Peppin. Pamela and I just celebrated our fiftieth anniversary and that was the start of many very happy years. They had all been close friends of mine since I was at Bartlett because they were studying just next door at the Slade School of Fine Art. 

I did take the opening of the New Arts Lab as the opportunity to stop working in architecture and to set up a cybernetics workshop. I kind of moved to the lab and started working on stuff without any income. It was a big risk, but London was cheap then, and I got odd bits of jobs that helped me stay afloat. When we were setting up the Arts Lab, I persuaded the group to incorporate it as the Institute for Research in Art and Technology (IRAT), because I saw an opportunity to bridge the more hippie-orientated Arts Lab scene with the academic world. The institute only lasted a couple of years, but it did influence the London arts scene. 

{% 'image_03_institute_of_research' %}

**PA:** Throughout your career, you have been part of groups and social formations that have existed within and beyond the UK, and have contributed to the development of the digital arts. For example, CAS and IRAT, both of which you mentioned earlier. 

Could you expand on these and other digital art communities that you belong to, that have been influential to the development of your practice?

**JL:** The Robert Street New Arts Lab moved on to be what was called The Dairy, in Chalk Farm. This space was less public, it operated more like private studios, although there were some public activities going on. That building, like the Robert Street one, had been leased from Camden Council on a nominal rent because the council bought those spaces to demolish them and build public housing. There were these short periods of two to three years before these buildings would get torn down where we could improve them and make use of them. Pamela and I felt that we needed something more settled after Drury Lane, Robert Street and the Dairy, so we bought a house in Dorset and started having children. I started teaching in 1974 at the RCA, in London, in the Department of Environmental Media and carried out research in the Design Research Department there too. Around that time, I wanted to expand my practice by doing more serious research and I obtained a grant from the UK’s Science Research Council to develop a project on computer simulation of cognition in architectural design. 

In 1977, Pam’s parents started building a ski area in Telluride, Colorado, and asked us to go there for a year to help with the business. At the end of the year, they sold the controlling interest to developers. We thought then that we would go back to Dorset, but the developers asked me to design a new resort town for a population of 8,000. It was an incredible opportunity, from a design point of view, and we decided to stay longer. For a variety of reasons, we just ended up living in Colorado and we are still here. My life changed completely at this point, because I stopped being heavily involved in digital art. But some of those ideas had continuity in other projects. Prior to Colorado, in London, I had met the artist Richard Lowenberg as we both were part of *The Secret Life of Plants* (released 1979) movie, for which I had taken my piece *Green Music (1973, and later versions)*, which made live music from the electrical activity within plants,* to Los Angeles and San Francisco to film it in operation. Richard had done other interactive work with dancers and other collaborators. We became very close friends. In 1979, Pam and I worked with Richard on an event called ‘Arts and Sciences’, which brought together artists and scientists to Telluride. It was so successful that in 1984 it led us to co-founding the non-profit Telluride Institute that operates across the spectrum of  arts, humanities and sciences. Richard worked with us for many years, before moving to Santa Fe. This year (2024) we have celebrated the fortieth anniversary of the Telluride Institute, and Richard, at the same time, put on a reprise of Arts and Sciences. His eight-day event was distributed on the internet by The Leonardo Art Science Evening Rendezvous (LASER).

{% figuregroup '2', 'image_04_john_lifton, image_05_john_lifton' %}

**PA:** As a practitioner with expertise in the field of electronic systems and their relationship with natural processes, could you outline some of the key technologies and tools that have made your practice possible?   

**JL:** It is hard to describe how primitive the field was back then. The reason I first got involved with technology was that I had a great love of music. Around the age of 10, I started building amplifiers, loudspeakers and other pieces of valve (tube) audio equipment. I used to get the parts from electronic component stores in London. I remember buying my first transistors a bit later. There were only three types of transistors that you could buy: red, green and white. They were all made on the same production line, and someone would manually test each one of them for gain and put on a colour paint spot. 

When I got interested in the creative use of computing, and not having any access to computers, I started building the circuits I needed, which were initially analogue. In the mid-1960s, the first integrated circuits (ICs) appeared. Back then, I remember going around the headquarters of the manufacturers in London and begging for gifts of integrated circuits for artistic use. Most of the time they were surprised and charmed that somebody would want to use their products for art, which made them generous. These early microchips had few logic gates or operations and typically contained 20 to 30 transistors within each chip. I could manage to design what I needed using them because it was very simple. 

Transistors and integrated circuits were key technologies in my early work, and they appeared just at the right time. Most of the people that I knew who were interested in computer arts back then managed to get occasional access to computer terminals that had online connections to digital computers which were running at 110 bits per second. The speed of this online connection seems useless now, but it was amazing and wonderful at that time. The Teletype ASR-33 terminals were a great hit, preceding personal computers. 

Later, when I set up the cybernetic workshop at the New Arts Lab in 1968, we installed an ASR-33 terminal. If it was for artistic purposes only, anybody could come and use it for free and it got quite a lot of use. I was told later that this was probably the first free computer terminal in the world dedicated solely to the arts. 

**PA:** Could you tell us how you managed supporting other artists to use this technology?

**JL:** I did not personally get involved in that, but these types of terminals were run using BASIC as a programming language. CAS put on training programmes to teach people how to use them, and there were many artists that got involved and put a lot of time into learning how to program and ended up producing very serious work. Colin Emmett, in particular, made heavy use of this terminal, sometimes working on it all through the night.

The speed things were happening was remarkable. Only six years later, the RCA was the only arts institution in the world on the Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET), the forerunner of the internet, run by the USA military. When I worked there, the artist Harold Cohen visited the Design Research Department and produced a drawing which was programmed in San Diego and printed in London. We regarded this as the first true international work of computer art, because it was produced in real time across two continents. 

Harold had been Pamela’s teacher at the Slade. He moved to the USA in 1968 and worked as a lecturer at the University of California in San Diego. He ended up working there for 30 years and we would occasionally visit him. By the early 1970s, he had produced an early version of his computer program AARON, which generated paintings and drawings. I consider Harold’s work to be at that time the most sophisticated computer art that was being made anywhere. He was a first rate painter himself plus he really liked programming, which was an ideal combination. 

{% 'image_06_harold_cohen' ^%}

**PA:** Finally, it would be interesting to hear about the thinkers and theoretical concepts that have helped shape your work.

**JL:** When I think back to that time, there was not a lot of theorizing going on. People were excited about getting their hands on computers and doing stuff. But there were two professors at Bartlett that really helped shape my thinking. The first one was the extraordinary engineer Richard Buckminster Fuller. He only came for a few days each year, but I found him incredibly interesting. He saw nature as the epitome of energy and material efficiency. He wanted engineering to imitate that, not formally, but he thought great design should produce the maximum performance-per-kilogram weight of the materials that you are using. And, geodesic domes, which he invented, for him were moving that concern as an engineer into architecture. I couldn't have disagreed more with him, but this was very important at the same time. I still have a tiny bucket in a corner of my mind that uses this test on things. I'll give you an example of why I don't agree with Buckminster. I have a great admiration for Scandinavian sod roofs, which go back at least 1,500 years. These start with a layer of bark put down as a waterproofing layer. Then they dig up lots of sods, usually 15 to 20 centimetres deep. And they pack them on top to recreate the natural surface of the ground. And this is almost the antithesis of Buckminster's goal. This roof is incredibly heavy, and it requires a massive wooden structure underneath to support that weight. From an engineering point of view it has a very low performance-per-kilogram weight. Why would one want to build a roof like that now? Well, first, the sod roof materials are cheap because they don't need to be shaped much. Second, the materials come from the site, so they do not need to be transported. Third, the local ecosystem is preserved, and the roof will last for hundreds of years with very little maintenance. And finally, it's beautiful and it's a profound aesthetic statement about living gently on the land. My generation’s view of nature was totally different from his, which dated back to the 1930s. 

The second influential person is the architect Peter Reyner Banham, mostly known as Reyner Banham. He made his reputation by writing the first detailed description of the Modern Movement which treated it with the same historical seriousness as other major architectural movements. Banham was our on-staff history teacher at Bartlett. During my first year there, the Modern Movement was the only history that was taught, which was totally revolutionary at the time for a school of architecture. He later became my thesis supervisor and a very good friend. He was an advisory board member on the New Arts Lab. I think the important thing I learned from him was to have very high standards of accuracy and strictness in conducting research. This improved the quality of everything that I did, including artworks and anything that required study.
